---
title:       Exercise 2.1-3
published:   2012-08-22 20:10
modified:    2020-10-03 14:30
keywords:    "linear search"
description: "Consider the searching problem: Input: A sequence of nnn numbers A=⟨a1,a2,…,an⟩ and a value v. Output: An index i such that v = A[i] or the special value NIL if v does not appear in A."
---

> Consider the ***searching problem***:
>
> **Input**: A sequence of $$n$$ numbers $$A = \langle a_1, a_2, \ldots , a_n \rangle$$ and a value $$v$$.
>
> **Output**: An index $$i$$ such that $$v = A[i]$$ or the special value $$\text {NIL}$$ if $$v$$ does not appear in $$A$$.
>
> Write pseudocode for ***linear search***, which scans through the sequence, looking for $$v$$. Using a loop invariant, prove that your algorithm is correct. Make sure that your loop invariant fulfills the three necessary properties.

For *linear search*, we just need to scan the array from the beginning till the end, index $$1$$ to index $$n$$, and check if the entry  at that position equal to $$v$$ or not. The pseudocode can be written as follows...

{% capture code %}
for i = 1 to A.length
    if A[i] == v
        return i
return NIL
{% endcapture %}
{% include clrs_code.html title='LINEAR-SEARCH(A, v)' %}

#### Loop Invariant

> At the start of the each iteration of the **for** loop of lines 1-3, the subarray $$A[1 .. i − 1]$$ does not contain the value $$v$$.

And here is how the three necessary properties hold for the loop invariant:

**Initialization:** Initially the subarray is empty. So, none of its' elements are equal to $$v$$.

**Maintenance:** In $$i$$-th iteration, we check whether $$A[i]$$ is equal to $$v$$ or not. If yes, we terminate the loop or we continue the iteration. So, if the subarray $$A[1..i - 1]$$ did not contain $$v$$ before the $$i$$-th iteration, the subarray $$A[1..i]$$ will not contain $$v$$ before the next iteration (unless $$i$$-th iteration terminates the loop).

**Termination:** The loop terminates in either of the following cases,

* We have reached index $$i$$ such that $$v$$ = $$A[i]$$, or
* We reached the end of the array, i.e. we did not find $$v$$ in the array $$A$$. So, we return $$\text {NIL}$$.

In either case, our algorithm does exactly what was required, which means the algorithm is correct.
