---
title:      Exercise 2.3-4
clrs:       [2, 3]
date:       2012-08-22 22:15
edit:       2020-10-04 20:30
---

> We can express insertion sort as a recursive procedure as follows. In order to sort $$A[1..n]$$, we recursively sort $$A[1..n-1]$$ and then insert A[n] into the sorted array $$A[1..n-1]$$. Write a recurrence for the running time of this recursive version of insertion sort.

There are two steps in this recursive sorting algorithm:

1. Sort the sub-array $$A[1..n-1]$$
2. Insert $$A[n]$$ into the sorted sub-array from step 1 in proper position

For $$n = 1$$, step 1 doesn't take any time as the sub-array is an empty array and step 2 takes constant time, i.e. the algorithm runs in $$\Theta(1)$$ time.

For $$n > 1$$, step 1 again calls for the recursion for $$n - 1$$ and step 2 runs in $$\Theta(n)$$ time.

So, we can write the recurrence as:

$$T(n) = \begin {cases}
    \Theta(1)               & \text { if } n = 1, \\
    T(n - 1) + \Theta(n)    & \text { if } n > 1
\end {cases}$$

{% include ads.html %}

### Additional Analysis

Although it has not been asked in the problem statement, let us try to solve the recurrence for practice the same way it was done for $$\textsc {Insertion-Sort}$$ in the book or for $$\textsc {Selection-Sort}$$ in [Exercise 2.2-2]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url /02/2012-08-22-E02.02-02 %}).

Let us first write the pseudocode for auxiliary procedure required to insert $$A[n]$$ into the sorted array as follows ...

{% capture code %}
key = A[k]
index = k - 1
while index > 0 and A[index] > key
    A[index + 1] = A[index]
    index = index - 1
A[index + 1] = key
{% endcapture %}
{% include clrs_code.html title="Insert(A, k)" %}

And recursive insertion sort as follows ...
{% capture code %}
if n > 1
    Recurse-Insertion-Sort(A, n - 1)
    Insert(A, n)
{% endcapture %}
{% include clrs_code.html title="Recurse-Insertion-Sort(A, n)" %}

#### Intuitive Solution

As it is probably evident from the pseudocode, to insert the an element in a sorted sorted array in its' rightful position, we'll need to shift *some* of the elements to the right to make space for the new element.

In the worst case, when the new element is smaller than all elements in the array, all the $$n$$ elements has to be shifted. Which means it'll be $$\Theta(n)$$ operation.

In the average case, we can assume the new element will smaller than half of the elements and larger than the other half. Which means we will need to shift $$n/2$$ elements, which is again a $$\Theta(n)$$ operation.

And this shifting has to be done for all of the $$n$$ elements one by one while recursing. Which makes the complete algorithm run at $$n \times \Theta(n) = \Theta(n^2)$$.

An exhaustive calculation is provided below for the sake of completeness.

{% include ads.html %}

#### Exhaustive Proof

Let us assume that for $$n = 1$$, $$T(n) = c_1$$, where $$c_1$$ is some constant. And on average for $$n > 1$$, inserting an element in its proper position in a sorted array requires shifting half of the elements (as explained above), i.e. $$c_2n/2 + c_3$$ time ($$c_2n/2$$ for shifting the elements and $$c_3$$ for inserting the element).

So, we can rewrite the recurrence as:

$$T(n) = \begin {cases}
    c_1                              & \text { if } n = 1, \\
    T(n - 1) + c_2 \frac {(n - 1)} 2 + c_3    & \text { if } n > 1
\end {cases}$$

So for any general $$n > 1$$,

$$\begin {aligned}
T(n) & = T(n - 1) + c_2 \frac {(n - 1)} 2 + c_3 \\
     & = \left( T(n - 2) + c_2 \frac {(n - 2)} 2 + c_3 \right) + c_2 \frac {(n - 1)} 2 + c_3 \\
     & = T(1) + \cdots + \left( c_2 \frac {(n - 2)} 2 + c_3 \right) + \left( c_2 \frac {(n - 1)} 2 + c_3 \right) \\
     & = c_1 + \frac {c_2} 2 \left(1 + 2 + \cdot \cdot \cdot + (n - 1)\right) + c_3(n - 1) \\
     & = c_1 + \frac {c_2} 2 \cdot \frac {n(n - 1)} 2 + c_3(n - 1) \\
     & = \Theta(n^2)
\end {aligned}$$
