---
title:      Problem 2-1
clrs:       [2, 0]
date:       2012-08-22 23:00
---

>***Insertion Sort on Small Arrays in Merge Sort***
>
>Although merge sort runs in $$\Theta(n \lg n)$$ worst-case time and insertion sort runs in $$\Theta(n^2)$$ worst-case time, the constant factors in insertion sort make it faster for small $$n$$. Thus, it makes sense to use insertion sort within merge sort when subproblems become sufficiently small. Consider a modification to merge sort in which $$n/k$$ sublists of length $$k$$ are sorted using insertion sort and then merged using the standard merging mechanism, where $$k$$ is a value to be determined.
>
>1. Show that the $$n/k$$ sublists, each of length $$k$$, can be sorted by insertion sort in $$\Theta(nk)$$ worst-case time.
<br/>
2. Show that the sublists can be merged in $$\Theta(n \lg(n/k))$$ worst-case time.
<br/>
3. Given that the modified algorithm runs in $$\Theta(nk + n \lg(n/k))$$ worst-case time, what is the largest asymptotic ($$\Theta$$-notation) value of $$k$$ as a function of $$n$$ for which the modified algorithm has the same asymptotic running time as standard merge sort?
<br/>
4. How should $$k$$ be chosen in practice?

<b>1. Sorting Sublists</b>

For input of size $$k$$, insertion sort runs on $$\Theta(k^2)$$ worst-case time, i.e. running time of the form $$(ak^2 + bk + c)$$. So, worst-case time required to sort $$n/k$$ sublists, each of length $$k$$, with insertion sort:

$$T(k) = \frac n k (ak^2 +bk +c) = ank + bn + \frac {cn} k$$

Now, $$k$$ is an integer significantly smaller than $$n$$. So, for sufficiently large values of $$n$$, we can ignore the last two term of $$T(k)$$. So, $$T(k) = \Theta(nk)$$.

<br/>
<b>2. Merging Sublists</b>

We have $$n$$ elements divided into $$n/k$$ sorted sublists each of length $$k$$. To merge these $$n/k$$ sorted sublists to get a single sorted list of length $$n$$, we have to take 2 sublists at a time and continue to merge them. This will result in $$\log (n/k)$$ steps (If you have problem understanding this statement, refer to Figure 2.5 in page 35 of the chapter text). And in every step, we are essentially going to compare $$n$$ elements. So the whole process will run at $$\Theta(n \lg (n/k))$$.

<br/>
<b>3. Largest Value of $$k$$</b>

For the modified algorithm to have the same asymptotic running time as standard merge sort, $$\Theta(nk + n \lg(n/k)) = \Theta(nk + n \lg n - n \lg k)$$ must be same as $$\Theta(n \lg n)$$.

To satisfy this condition, $$k$$ cannot grow faster than $$\lg n$$ asymptotically (if $$k$$ grows faster than $$\lg n$$, because of the $$nk$$ term, the algorithm will run at worse asymptotic time than $$\Theta(n \lg n)$$). But just this argument is not enough as we have to check for $$k = \Theta(\lg n)$$, the requirement holds or not.

If we assume, $$k = \Theta(\lg n)$$,

$$\begin {align}
\Theta(nk + n \lg(n/k)) & = \Theta(nk + n \lg n - n \lg k) \\
                        & = \Theta(n \lg n + n \lg n - n \lg (\lg n)) \\
                        & = \Theta(2n \lg n - n \lg (\lg n)) ^\dagger \\
                        & = \Theta(n \lg n) \\
\end {align}$$

$$^\dagger\lg (\lg n)$$ is very small compared to $$\lg n$$ for sufficiently larger values of $$n$$.

<br/>
<b>4. Practical Value of $$k$$</b>

To determine a practical value for $$k$$, we need to calculate the exact running time expressions with proper values for the constant factors and use the method described in [Excercise 1.2.2]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url /01/2012-08-19-E01.02-02 %}).
