---
title:      Problem 2-3
clrs:       [2, 0]
date:       2012-08-22 23:10
---

>***Correctness of Horner’s Rule***
>
>The following code fragment implements Horner’s rule for evaluating a polynomial
> 
>$$\begin {align}
P(x) & = \sum _{k = 0}^n a_k x^k \\
     & = a_0 + x(a_1 + x(a_2 +· · · + x(a_{n − 1} + xa_n) · · ·))
\end {align}$$
> 
>given the coefficients $$a_0, a_1, . . . , a_n$$ and a value for $$x$$:
> 
>       1   y = 0
      2   i = n
      3   while i ≥ 0
      4       do y = a_i + x * y
      5       i = i − 1
> 
>1. What is the asymptotic running time of this code fragment for Horner’s rule?
<br/>
2. Write pseudocode to implement the naive polynomial-evaluation algorithm that computes each term of the polynomial from scratch. What is the running time of this algorithm? How does it compare to Horner’s rule?
<br/>
3. Prove that the following is a loop invariant for the while loop in lines 3–5.
>**At the start of each iteration of the while loop of lines 3–5,**
$$y = \sum_{k = 0}^{n − (i + 1)} a_{k + i + 1}x^k\\$$
Interpret a summation with no terms as equaling 0. Your proof should follow the structure of the loop invariant proof presented in this chapter and should show that, at termination, $$y = \sum_{k = 0}^n a_k x^k$$.
<br/>
4. Conclude by arguing that the given code fragment correctly evaluates a polynomial characterized by the coefficients $$a_0, a_1, . . . , a_n$$.

<b>1. Asymptotic Running Time</b>

From the pseudocode of Horner's Rule, the algorithm runs in a loop for all the elements, i.e. it runs at $$\Theta(n)$$ time.

<br/>
<b>2. Comparison with Naive Algorithm</b>

Pseudocode for `NAIVE-POLY-EVAL(A, x)`, where $$A$$ is the array of length $$n + 1$$ consisting of the coefficients $$a_0, a_1, . . . , a_n$$.
{% highlight java linenos %}
y = 0
for i = 1 to A.length
    m = 1
    for j = 1 to i - 1
        m = m * x
    y = y + A[i] * m
{% endhighlight %}

The above algorithm runs with for inside another for loop $$j$$ multiplications to evaluate $$a_j x^j$$ and $(n - 1)$ additions in total to evaluate a polynomial. Hence, it does $$\sum_{j = 0}^n j = n(n + 1)/2$$ multiplications and $$(n - 1)$$ additions. Therefore, the algorithm runs at $$\Theta(n^2)$$ time.

This algorithm is obviously worse than Horner's rule which runs at linear time.

<br/>
<b>3. Loop Invariant for the While Loop</b>

**Initialization:** At the start of the first iteration, we have $$i = n$$. So,

$$\begin {align}
y & = \sum_{k = 0}^{n − (i + 1)} a_{k + i + 1}x^k \\
  & = \sum_{k = 0}^{n − (n + 1)} a_{k + n + 1}x^k \\
  & = \sum_{k = 0}^-1 a_{k + n + 1}x^k \\
  & = 0
\end {align}$$

As the sum is zero, the loop invariant holds after the first loop.

**Maintenance:** From the loop invariant, for any arbitrary $$0 <= i < n$$, at the start of the $$i$$-th iteration of the while loop of lines 3–5, $$y = \sum_{k = 0}^{n − (i + 1)} a_{k + i + 1}x^k$$

Now, after the $$i$$-th iteration,

$$\begin {align}
y' & = a_i + x \cdot y \\
   & = a_i + x \cdot \sum_{k = 0}^{n − (i + 1)} a_{k + i + 1}x^k \\
   & = a_i x^0 + \sum_{k = 0}^{n − (i + 1)} a_{k + i + 1}x^{k + 1} \\
   & = \sum_{k = -1}^{n − (i + 1)} a_{k + i + 1}x^{k + 1} \\
   & = \sum_{k' = 0}^{n − (i + 1)} a_{k' + i}x^k' \\
   & = \sum_{k' = 0}^{n − (i' + 1)} a_{k' + i' + 1}x^k'
\end {align}$$

So, the loop invariant also holds after the loop.

We make two assumption:

* $$k' = k + 1$$ : This is valid as $$k$$ is nothing but the summation parameter.
* $$i' = i - 1$$ : This holds as this is precisely the operation done in line 5.

**Termination:** When the loop terminates, we have $$i = -1$$. So,

$$\begin {align}
y & = \sum_{k = 0}^{n − (i + 1)} a_{k + i + 1}x^k \\
  & = \sum_{k = 0}^{n − (-1 + 1)} a_{k - 1 + 1}x^k \\
  & = \sum_{k = 0}^n a_k x^k
\end {align}$$

This is precisely what we wanted to calculate.

<br/>
<b>4. Correctness Argument</b>

When Horner's rule terminates it successfully evaluates the polynomial as it intended to. This means the algorithm is correct.
