---
title:      Exercise 4.1-3
clrs:       [4, 1]
date:       2012-08-28 18:10
---

> Implement both the brute-force and recursive algorithms for the maximum-subarray problem on your own computer. What problem size $$n_0$$ gives the crossover point at which the recursive algorithm beats the brute-force algorithm? Then, change the base case of the recursive algorithm to use the brute-force algorithm whenever the problem size is less than $$n_0$$. Does that change the crossover point?

Both the algorithms were developed on my system in C++ (code can be downloaded from [here]({{ '/assets/code/E413.cpp' | prepend: site.baseurl }} "C++ code for maximum subarray run time analysis"){:target="_blank"}). You can also find an embedded Python code that you can run directly from your browser at the [bottom of the page](#code-editor).

The data collected is as follows (size is the number of elements processed and run times are in micro seconds):

| Size | BruteForce | Recursive |
|:----:|:----------:|:---------:|
|  20  |   1.1573   |  1.3096   |
|  21  |   1.1346   |  1.3642   |
|  22  |   1.2318   |  1.3632   |
|  23  |   1.3214   |  1.4604   |
|  24  |   1.4080   |  1.5070   |
|  25  |   1.4860   |  1.6002   |
|  26  |   1.6113   |  1.6982   |
|  27  |   1.7965   |  1.8065   |
|**28**| **1.8434** |**1.8172** |
|  29  |   2.1403   |  1.9220   |
|  30  |   2.0902   |  1.9593   |
|  31  |   2.2252   |  2.0011   |
|  32  |   2.3875   |  2.1071   |

So, on my computer $$n_0 = 28$$.

However, it varies between 25 and 30 in different runs.

___

If we modify the the base case of the recursive algorithm to use the brute-force algorithm whenever the problem size is less than $$n_0$$, the crossover point doesn't change significantly.

However, in most cases, I have noticed there is not a single crossover point. Let's say, recursive beats brute-force at $$n = 22$$, but immediately after that ($$n = 23, 24$$) brute-force beats recursive, and then recursive beats brute-force again for $$n = 25$$.

{% include ads.html %}

___

{% capture note %}
Previous iteration of this post, around 2015, when I was using Intel i5 3570K (4 cores @3.4 GHz), had $$n_0 = 17$$.

Now in 2021, I'm using AMD Ryzen 1600 (6 cores @3.2GHz) along with many other system upgrades like better RAM, cache size etc. (also <span class="rainbow">RGB</span>) and $$n_0 = 28$$.

This clearly shows the increase in raw computation power of my system as it has pushed the performance of brute force algorithm.
{% endcapture %}
{% include aside.html title='A note on processing power' %}

#### Python Code

{% include code/code.html file='code/04/code_E040103.py' %}
