---
title:       Exercise 4.3-8
published:   2012-08-28 20:35
modified:    2021-01-21 10:30
keywords:    "recurrence, substitution"
description: "Using the master method in Section 4.5, you can show that the solution to the recurrence T(n) = 4T(n/2) + n is T(n) = Θ(n²). Show that a substitution proof with the assumption T(n) ≤ cn² fails."
---

> Using the master method in Section 4.5, you can show that the solution to the recurrence $$T(n) = 4T(n/2) + n$$ is $$T(n) = \Theta(n^2)$$. Show that a substitution proof with the assumption $$T(n) \le cn^2$$ fails. Then show how to subtract off a lower-order term to make a substitution proof work.

Let us assume $$T(n) \le cn^2$$ for all $$n \ge n_0$$, where $$c$$ and $$n_0$$ are positive constants.

$$\begin {aligned}
T(n) & = 4T\left( \frac n 2\right) + n \\
     & \le 4c\left( \frac n 2\right)^2 + n \\
     & = cn^2 + n
\end {aligned}$$

With this we cannot prove our assumption in it's exact form.

Now, let us assume $$T(n) \le cn^2 - bn$$ for all $$n \ge n_0$$, where $$b$$, $$c$$, and $$n_0$$ are positive constants.

$$\begin {aligned}
T(n) & = 4T\left( \frac n 2\right) + n \\
     & \le 4\left(c\left( \frac n 2\right)^2 - \frac {bn} 2\right) + n \\
     & = 4\left(c\frac {n^2} 4 - \frac {bn} 2\right) + n \\
     & = cn^2 - 2bn + n \\
     & = cn^2 - bn - (b - 1)n\\
     & \le cn^2 - bn
\end {aligned}$$

The last step holds as long as $$(b - 1)n$$ is positive.

If we set $$n_0 = 1$$, our hypothesis works for any $$b \ge 1$$.

**Note:** We have just shown the $$O$$-bound. But to show $$\Theta$$-bound, we also need to show $$\Omega$$-bound, which can be done by adding the lower order term instead of subtracting.

{% capture note %}
If your edition of the book has the recurrence as $$T(n) = 4T(n/3) + \textcolor {red} {n^2}$$, then the problem statement is not correct. In that case the correct bound is $$\Theta(n^2 \lg n)$$, not $$\Theta(n^2)$$.

This has been corrected in later revisions of the book. And  you can find the errata details [here](https://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/~thc/clrs-bugs/bugs-3e.php 'CLRS errata'){:target='_blank'}.
{% endcapture %}
{% include aside.html title='N vs N²' %}
